---
layout: post
author: David Conmy
title: About this site
title-image: /assets/images/svg/jekyll.svg
title-image-alt: Jekyll Image

excerpt_separator: <!--exerpt-->
---
I built this site using a number of different tools

- Jekyll
- Liquid
- Bootstrap
- Javascript
- Gulp
- Node
- Ruby

<!--exerpt-->

My intention for this site was to create a static website that I could host online.
I would use the website to host my CV and also use it as a landing page for my personal domain [conmy.me](http://conmy.me).

The static-ness of the website was important to me. I didn't want my website to rely on many external services. I especially did not want to have to host these services myself.

In the past, I have used Wordpress for building and serving my website. This has had a number of advantages and disadvantages:

#### Advantages

- Reliable
- Themable
- Customizable
- Well supported
- Supports Blogging

#### Disadvantages

- Rather robust for my actual needs
- Required a database for content management
- Self hosting will usually infer a cost for resources used

Then, I came across Jekyll.

{% include image.html url='/assets/images/svg/jekyll.svg' description='Jekyll Logo' %}

Jekyll is a simple static-web-page generator that would allow me to create content in markdown and turn that content in to web pages.
It also supports Liquid, HTML and CSS so I could create a website that was styled and responsive. It seemed like it is an ideal candidate for the job. It is blog-aware, so I would not be compromising on my ability to write posts to the website (which I thought would be inevitable if I was trying to stay away from hosting a database of some kind)

On top of all this, it is supported by github-pages - so technically, I could host the website from there for free and link it with my domain AND my github account.